feat(dedicated/api-os-installation): add new page (#5760)
ovh/docs: pages/bare_metal_cloud/dedicated_servers/api-os-installation/guide.en-gb.md

excerpt: Use OVHcloud API to install or re-install an OS on your dedicated server
updated: 2024-02-07
---

## Objective

Fully automating OS installation or re-installation on a [dedicated server](https://www.ovhcloud.com/en-gb/bare-metal/) with the [OVHcloud API](/pages/manage_and_operate/api/first-steps) can be interesting in various situations.

## Requirements

- A [dedicated server](https://www.ovhcloud.com/en-gb/bare-metal/) in your OVHcloud account
- Access to the [OVHcloud API](/pages/manage_and_operate/api/first-steps)

> [!warning]
>
> A new installation will erase all the data on the server.
>

## Instructions

### OS Compatibility <a name="os-compatibility"></a>

Log in to the [API console](https://api.ovh.com/) and go to the `/dedicated/server`{.action} section.

You can list all your [dedicated servers](https://www.ovhcloud.com/en-gb/bare-metal/) with the following API call:

> [!api]
>
> @api {v1} /dedicated/server GET  /dedicated/server
>

To list all compatible OSes for a specific dedicated server, you can use the following API call:

> [!api]
>
> @api {v1} /dedicated/server GET  /dedicated/server/{serviceName}/install/compatibleTemplates
>

> In the response, look at the sub-hash `ovh`: this is the list of OSes in the OVHcloud catalog that you can install on this server.

Reviewer: Do people (I mean besides Perl developers) really call things hashes?
```suggestion
In the response, look at the contents of the `ovh` key: this is the list of OSes in the OVHcloud catalog that you can install on this server.
```

### OS Details informations <a name="os-details"></a>

In the `/dedicated/installationTemplate`{.action} section, you can display the details for a specific OS:

> [!api]
>
> @api {v1} /dedicated/installationTemplate GET  /dedicated/installationTemplate/{templateName}
>

You can find interesting informations such as for example:

|Attribut|Description|
|---|---|
|distribution|OS Name|
|description|OS Display Name|
|endOfInstall|OVHcloud OS end of availability date¹|
|usage,category,family|Usage, category, and OS family|
|project/os|Informations about OS governance, version, release notes and projet URL|
|project/usage|Same as project/os, but at the software layer if applicable|
|license/os|Informations about OS license : licensing contract URL and licensing type|
|license/usage|Same as license/os, but at the software layer if applicable|
|filesystems|Compatible file systems types|
|hardRaidConfiguration,softRaidOnlyMirroring,lvmReady|Compatibility with hardware raids, software raids and LVM²|
|inputs|OS specific questions (see explanation above)|

> ¹ Customers that don't use images from OVHcloud catalog (installation from a custom image ([BYOI](/pages/bare_metal_cloud/dedicated_servers/bring-your-own-image)/[BYOLinux](/pages/bare_metal_cloud/dedicated_servers/bring-your-own-linux)), installation over the network, or manually via IPMI) are not affected by this limitation.<br />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
¹ Customers that don't use images from the OVHcloud catalogue (installation from a custom image ([BYOI](/pages/bare_metal_cloud/dedicated_servers/bring-your-own-image)/[BYOLinux](/pages/bare_metal_cloud/dedicated_servers/bring-your-own-linux)), installation over the network, or manually via IPMI) are not affected by this limitation.<br />
```
* catalogue is the british spelling and this is the GB file
* "the" should be added to all English variants

² For more details, see [partitioning customization](/pages/bare_metal_cloud/dedicated_servers/partitioning_ovh).<br />

> [!primary]
>

> > If you need to have all those informations for all available OSes in the catalog, you should consider using the API call `/dedicated/installationTemplate/templateInfos`{.action} instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you need to see this information for all available OSes in the catalog, you should consider using the API call `/dedicated/installationTemplate/templateInfos`{.action} instead.
```

>

> [!api]
>
> @api {v1} /dedicated/installationTemplate GET  /dedicated/installationTemplate/templateInfos
>

### OS Questions <a name="os-inputs"></a>

> Some OSes can have a list of specific questions. If that's the case, attribute `inputs` contains a list of questions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some OSes can have a list of specific questions. If that is the case, the `inputs` key contains a list of questions.
```
Not sure we should call it key or attribute though

Example of specific questions for Windows Server 2022 Standard (Core):

```json
{
    "inputs": [
        {
            "default": "en-us",
            "mandatory": false,
            "type": "enum",
            "name": "language",
            "description": "Display Language",
            "enum": [
                "en-us",
                "fr-fr"
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

Each question has the following attributes:

|Attribut|Description|
|---|---|
|default|If no answer is provided, this value will be used|
|mandatory|If this question is mandatory¹|
|type|Value type expected in the answer|
|name|Question name (used as identifier)|
|description|Question description|
|enum|Possible values (only applicable for `enum` `type`)|

> ¹ If a mandatory question without default value is not answered, API will return an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
¹ If a mandatory question without default value is not answered, the API will return an error.
```

### Disk Groups <a name="disk-group"></a>

> Some [dedicated servers](https://www.ovhcloud.com/fr/bare-metal/) have multiple groups of disks; For example a group with SATA disks and a group with SSD disks. Those servers are sometimes also called **hybrid servers**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some [dedicated servers](https://www.ovhcloud.com/fr/bare-metal/) have multiple groups of disks; for example one group with SATA disks and another group with SSD disks. Those servers are sometimes also called **hybrid servers**.
```

  "diskGroups": [
    {
      "defaultHardwareRaidType": null,
      "numberOfDisks": 2,
      "diskGroupId": 1,
      "diskType": "SSD",
      "defaultHardwareRaidSize": null,
      "diskSize": {
        "unit": "GB",
        "value": 480
      },
      "description": "2 X Disk SSD 480 GB, JBOD",
      "raidController": null
    },
    {
      "defaultHardwareRaidType": null,
      "numberOfDisks": 2,
      "diskGroupId": 2,
      "diskType": "NVME",
      "defaultHardwareRaidSize": null,
      "diskSize": {
        "unit": "GB",
        "value": 1920
      },
      "raidController": null,
      "description": "2 X Disk NVME 1920 GB, JBOD"
    }
  ],
  "processorArchitecture": "x86_64",
  "coresPerProcessor": 64,
  "processorName": "Epyc7763",
  "formFactor": "1u",
  "motherboard": "S8036-M",
  "numberOfProcessors": 1,
  "usbKeys": null
}
```

In this example, there are 2 disk groups:

- the first one (diskGroupId=1) contains 2 disks of 480 GB each,
- the second one (diskGroupId=2) contains 2 disks of 1,9 TB each.

> [!primary]
>
> By default, OS will be installed on diskGroupId 1.
>

### Create an OS installation task <a name="install-task"></a>

> When you have gathered all informations that you need, you can create the OS installation task with the following API call:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you have gathered all the information that you need, you can create the OS installation task with the following API call:
```

> [!api]
>
> @api {v1} /dedicated/server POST /dedicated/server/{serviceName}/install/start
>

With the following parameters:

|Parameter|Value|Required|
|---|---|---|
|serviceName|Server name|✅|
|templateName|OS to install|✅|
|diskGroupId|Id of the disk group on which the OS will be installed|❌|
|customHostname|Custom hostname|❌|
|userMetadata|Answers to the OS specific questions|❌|

> `userMetadata` contains a list of key/value with the answers to the OS specific questions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`userMetadata` contains a list of key/value with the answers to the OS-specific questions:
```

- Key must be the `name` of the question,
- Value must be the answer to the question, in the requested `type`.

> Payload example to install Windows Server 2022 Standard (Core) in french:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Payload example to install Windows Server 2022 Standard (Core) in French:
```

```json
{
  "details": {

>     "customHostname": "ma-fenetre"

Reviewer: :rofl:

  },
  "templateName": "win2022core-std_64",
  "userMetadata": [
    {
      "key": "language",
      "value": "fr-fr"
    }
  ]
}
```

> Example of reply:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example reply:
```

```json
{
    "taskId": 123456789,
    "ticketReference": null,
    "lastUpdate": "2024-01-26T17:57:10+01:00",
    "needSchedule": false,
    "startDate": "2024-01-26T17:57:10+01:00",
    "status": "init",
    "doneDate": null,
    "tags": null,
    "comment": "Start dedicated server installation",
    "plannedInterventionId": null,
    "note": null,
    "function": "reinstallServer"
}
```

> `123456789` is the OS installation task id. You can follow the OS installation task status with the following API call:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`123456789` is the OS installation task ID. You can follow the OS installation task status with the following API call:
```

> [!api]
>
> @api {v1} /dedicated/server GET  /dedicated/server/{serviceName}/task/{taskId}
>

> You can also see a detailed progress of each step of the installation process, with the following API call:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also monitor the progress of the installation process with the following API call which displays a detailed list of steps:
```
Something like this?

---
title: OVHcloud API and OS Installation
excerpt: Use OVHcloud API to install or re-install an OS on your dedicated server

> updated: 2024-02-07

Author: ```suggestion
updated: 2024-02-12
```
